Add deprecation checklist document for Substrate (#1583)
paritytech/polkadot-sdk: substrate/docs/deprecation-process.md

# Deprecation Process

> This deprecation process makes sense while we don’t [SemVer](https://semver.org/), after that this process will most likely change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This deprecation process makes sense while we don’t use [SemVer](https://semver.org/).
After that, this process will most likely change.
```

> 
> As deprecation and removal of existing features can happen on any release we need to be mindful that external builders can be impacted by the changes we make.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As deprecation and removal of existing features can happen on any release, we need to be mindful that external builders could be impacted by the changes we make.
```

> 
> This process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the devex as smooth as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deprecation process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the developer experience, the DevEx, as smooth as possible.
```

> First of all we need to create a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` and add it to the [Runtime / FRAME](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40) project. This will make sure that the issue is added to the [Deprecation board](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40/views/12) for correct tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all we, need to create a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` and add it to the [Runtime / FRAME](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40) project. This will make sure that the issue is added to the [Deprecation board](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40/views/12) for correct tracking.
```

These are the actions to take:

> ### Hard deprecate by adding a warning message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Hard deprecate by adding a warning message
```

> The warning message should include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months from the deprecation notice is released. This means that the feature will be removed in a release within that month (or after, but never before). Something on these lines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The warning message should include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months after the deprecation notice is released.
This means that the feature will be removed in a release within that month (or after, but never before). Something along these lines:
```

```rust
#[deprecated(note = "`GenesisConfig` is planned to be removed in December 2023. 
Use `RuntimeGenesisConfig` instead.")]

```

> Some features cannot be label as deprecated, like [reexports](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/30827) or [dispatchables](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/182#issuecomment-1691684159) for instance. On cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some features cannot be labeled as deprecated, like [reexports](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/30827) or [dispatchables](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/182#issuecomment-1691684159), for instance.
On cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).
```

> ### Remove usage of the deprecated feature in the code base

Reviewer: I'd probably use `item` or something generic like that instead of feature, because it collides with Rust's feature flags. What do you think?

> Just make sure that we are not using the deprecated feature ourselves. If you added the deprecation warning from the previous step, this should be easy to get done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just make sure that we are not using the deprecated feature ourselves.
If you added the deprecation warning from the previous step, this can be done by making sure that warning is not shown when building the code.
```

### Update examples and tutorials

> Make sure that the rust docs is updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that the rust docs are updated.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We also want [https://docs.substrate.io/](https://docs.substrate.io/) to be updated, you can open an issue on [https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs).

### Announce the deprecation and removal

**At minimum they should be noted in the release log.**

> Sometimes the release note is not enough. Make sure you are as loud as you need to be for the magnitude of the breaking change. Some breaking changes have a bigger impact than others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes the release note is not enough.
Make sure you are as loud as you need to be for the magnitude of the breaking change. Some breaking changes have a bigger impact than others.
```

### Removal version is planned

Depending on the removal date indicated in the deprecation warning in the [first step](#hard-deprecate-by-adding-a-warning-message), the nature and the importance of the change, it might make sense to coordinate the release with other developers and with the Release team.

### Deprecated feature is removed

> The deprecated feature gets finally removed. Don’t forget to [announce this accordingly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The deprecated feature finally gets removed.
Don’t forget to [announce this accordingly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).
```

# Deprecation Process

This deprecation process makes sense while we don’t use [SemVer](https://semver.org/).
After that, this process will most likely change.
As deprecation and removal of existing features can happen on any release, we need to be mindful that external builders could be impacted by the changes we make.
The deprecation process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the developer experience, the DevEx, as smooth as possible.

> First of all we, need to create a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` and add it to the [Runtime / FRAME](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40) project. This will make sure that the issue is added to the [Deprecation board](https://github.com/orgs/paritytech/projects/40/views/12) for correct tracking.

Reviewer 2: What if other components are being deprecated? (e.g https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/4a235469fd7ec4c6575862b0f6428f3601a59b3e/substrate/client/chain-spec/src/chain_spec.rs#L456)

Or maybe is this guide only for runtime/frame?

Author: Oops, bad copy paste. This process has initially been developed for FRAME, but the idea is to reuse it to the entire Substrate.

These are the actions to take:

### Hard deprecate by adding a warning message

> The warning message should include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months after the deprecation notice is released.

Reviewer 2: Should date be mandatory or recommended?
```suggestion
The warning message shall include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months after the deprecation notice is released.
```

# Deprecation Process

This deprecation process makes sense while we don’t use [SemVer](https://semver.org/).
After that, this process will most likely change.
As deprecation and removal of existing features can happen on any release, we need to be mindful that external builders
could be impacted by the changes we make.
The deprecation process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the developer experience, the DevEx, as
smooth as possible.

To start a deprecation process a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` needs to be created for correct tracking.

> Then these are the actions to take:

Reviewer 2: Can `I11-deprecation` be used on PR?

Reviewer 2: ok, thanks for clarifying. I asked because doc says, that I11 can be used on issue/pr:
`I11-deprecation`: The current issue/pr is, or should be, part of a deprecation process.`

Author: Mmm I think that's a documentation error, @the-right-joyce could you please clarify on that one?

Reviewer 3: hi, can't remember why it's on `I*`, will move it to `T*`

Reviewer 3: @juangirini 
updated: T15-deprecation

[dispatchables](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/182#issuecomment-1691684159), for instance.
On cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).

## Remove usage of the deprecated feature in the code base

Just make sure that we are not using the deprecated feature ourselves.
If you added the deprecation warning from the previous step, this can be done by making sure that warning is not shown
when building the code.

## Update examples and tutorials

Make sure that the rust docs are updated.
We also want [https://docs.substrate.io/](https://docs.substrate.io/) to be updated, you can open an issue on [https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs).

## Announce the deprecation and removal

**At minimum they should be noted in the release log.**
Sometimes the release note is not enough.
Make sure you are as loud as you need to be for the magnitude of the breaking change. Some breaking changes have a
bigger impact than others.

## Removal version is planned

> Depending on the removal date indicated in the deprecation warning in the [first step](#hard-deprecate-by-adding-a-warning-message),

Reviewer 4: Can we add a template text? This makes it easy to search through the code base.  
I have been using `will be removed after ...` so far. You can search for it in the monorepo and see a few instances.

The deprecation process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the developer experience, the DevEx, as
smooth as possible.

To start a deprecation process a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` needs to be created for correct tracking.
Then these are the actions to take:

## Hard deprecate by adding a warning message

The warning message shall include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months after the deprecation
notice is released.
This means that the code will be removed in a release within that month (or after, but never before). Please use this
template, doing so makes it easy to search through the code base:

```rust
#[deprecated(note = "[DEPRECATED] will be removed after [DATE]. [ALTERNATIVE]")]
```
`[ALTERNATIVE]` won't always be possible but offer it if it is.

E.g.
```rust
#[deprecated(note = "`GenesisConfig` will be removed after December 2023. Use `RuntimeGenesisConfig` instead.")]
```

Some pieces of code cannot be labeled as deprecated, like [reexports](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/30827)
or [dispatchables](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/182#issuecomment-1691684159), for instance.

> On cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).
```

## Remove usage of the deprecated code in the code base

Just make sure that we are not using the deprecated code ourselves.
If you added the deprecation warning from the previous step, this can be done by making sure that warning is not shown
when building the code.

## Update examples and tutorials

Make sure that the rust docs are updated.

> We also want [https://docs.substrate.io/](https://docs.substrate.io/) to be updated, you can open an issue on [https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs).

Reviewer 6: In the short term, I'd say that it is primarily the responsibility of the author of the PR here to update these docs. If not feasible, they can reside to opening an issue.

# Deprecation Process

This deprecation process makes sense while we don’t use [SemVer](https://semver.org/).
After that, this process will most likely change.
As deprecation and removal of existing code can happen on any release, we need to be mindful that external builders
could be impacted by the changes we make.
The deprecation process tries to mitigate this impact, while still keeping the developer experience, the DevEx, as
smooth as possible.

To start a deprecation process a new issue with the label `I11-deprecation` needs to be created for correct tracking.
Then these are the actions to take:

## Hard deprecate by adding a warning message

The warning message shall include a removal month and year, which is suggested to be 6 months after the deprecation

> notice is released.

Reviewer 3: I would not recommend to set this time frame as a rule, it's good if your team is so organised that they know when they'll be ready to deprecate the code, but in some cases we can't really tell when this is gonna happen.. instead it's deprecated as soon as there's a replacement ready to merge

Author: > instead it's deprecated as soon as there's a replacement ready to merge

Yes, absolutely. The 6 months period is for the removal of the deprecated code, not for the deprecation itself.
When a piece of code is deprecated, it should be technically possible to be removed straight away. This period is for the downstream developers to have time to update their code. They should know when to expect the removal to happen.
Also, this timeframe (6 months or whatever was chosen) is only a lower bound, that's why the notice should look like `[DEPRECATED] will be removed after [DATE]`. This means that we are free to remove a code in 7 or 8 months even if we said that it will be removed after 6 months from now, but we shall not remove it before those 6 months.

or [dispatchables](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/issues/182#issuecomment-1691684159), for instance.
In cases like that we can only make a visible enough comment, and make sure that we [announce the deprecation properly](#announce-the-deprecation-and-removal).

## Remove usage of the deprecated code in the code base

Just make sure that we are not using the deprecated code ourselves.
If you added the deprecation warning from the previous step, this can be done by making sure that warning is not shown
when building the code.

## Update examples and tutorials

Make sure that the rust docs are updated.
We also need [https://docs.substrate.io/](https://docs.substrate.io/) to be updated accordingly. The repo behind it is
[https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs).

## Announce the deprecation and removal

**At minimum they should be noted in the release log.** Please see how to document a PR [here](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/docs/CONTRIBUTING.md#documentation).

> Sometimes the release note is not enough.

Reviewer 3: do we want to say here where else this should be mentioned then?

Reviewer 6: You should tie this into https://forum.parity.io/t/pr-documentation-prdoc/2065?
